                     Dungeon Crawl version 2.20
                  (Copyright 1997 Linley Henzell)

Crawl is a fun little game in the grand tradition of games like Rogue, PCHack
and Moria. Your objective is to travel deep into a subterranean cave complex
and retrieve one of the magical orbs of power, each of which is guarded by
many horrible and hideous creatures.

This file contains detailed instructions for playing Crawl. If you are
completely new to this kind of game, it may be worth your while to read at
least part (although it will probably confuse you somewhat), otherwise you
should probably just dive into the game and use the '?' command to give a list
of keys to use.

Character classes:
In your quest, you play as one of a number of different types of characters.
Although each has its own strengths and weaknesses, some are definitely easier
than others, at least to begin with. The best classes for a beginner are
probably Gladiators, fighters and Barbarians; if you really want to play a
magician, try a Conjurer. Each class starts out with a different set of skills
and items.

Fighters start with a decent weapon, a suit of armour and a shield. They have
a reasonable grounding in the arts of fighting, and have plenty of hit points.

The Priest is a competent fighter and can use magic quite effectively.
Priests descend into the dungeons to fight evil wherever they may find it.
Priests are especially good at casting holy spells, and every few levels the
gods will grant their Priests with one. Although priests enter the dungeon
with a mace (as well as a priestly robe and a few healing potions), this is
purely the result of an archaic tradition the reason for which has been lost
in the mists of time. Priests are not in any way restricted in their choice of
weapon skills.

The Thief is one of the trickiest classes to play. Thieves start out with a
large variety of useful skills. They are also adept at spotting traps and
secret doors, and unlike all other classes can find such things without
actively searching for them or using magic. Thieves start with a dagger, some
throwing darts, and leather armour.

The magician is the best at using magic. Magicians start with a dagger,
a robe, and a book of spells which should see them through the first several
levels. There are various kinds of magicians, and specialist wizards can fit
more spells of their speciality into memory. Magicians receive the greatest
amount of magic points as they increase in level.
 The Wizard is a magician who does not specialise in any area of magic.
They start with a variety of magical skills and the magic dart spell in memory.
 The Conjurer specialises in the violent and destructive magic of conjuration
spells. Like the Wizard, the Conjurer starts with the magic dart spell.
 The Enchanter specialises in the more subtle area of enchantment magic.
Although not as directly powerful as conjurations, high-level enchantments
offer a wide range of very handy effects. As there are no useful enchantment
spells of the first level, the Enchanter does not begin with any memorised
magic but has a magic wand to help survive until he or she can start learning
to use the craft properly, and is equipped with lightly enchanted weapons and
armour. Enchanters are themselves highly resistant to enchantments and similar
magics.
 The Summoner specialises in calling creatures from this and other worlds to
give assistance. Although they can at first summon only very wimpy creatures,
the more advanced summoning spells allow summoners to call on such powers as
elementals and demons.
 Finally, the Necromancer is a magician who specialises in the less pleasant
side of magic. Necromantic spells are a varied bunch, but many involve some
degree of risk or harm to the caster.

The Paladin is a cross between the Fighter and the Priest, a sort of militant
religious crusader. He or she enters the dungeon with a sword, a shield, a
robe, and a healing potion, and is occasionally granted holy spells.

The Gladiator is well trained in the art of fighting but, like the Paladin,
is not so good when fighting at a distance. In fact, Gladiators are pretty
terrible at anything except bashing monsters with heavy things. They start
with a nasty weapon, a small shield, and armour.

The Barbarian is a hardy warrior who fights well with many weapons. At the
eighth level of experience, Barbarians can attempt to go berserk (the 'O'
key); this gives them a great boost of speed as well as huge physical
strength, but leaves them completely drained when the effect wears off. They
enter the dungeon with a club, some spears, and a set of leather armour, and
are unusually resistant to diseases.

The Ranger is a fighter who specialises in missile weapons. A Ranger starts
with a bow and some arrows, as well as a hunting knife and a set of leathers.

An Assassin is a thief who is especially good at killing. Assassins are like
thieves in most respects, but begin more skilled at hand combat while lacking
the thief's special ability to perceive traps and secret doors.

Note: some aspects of these class descriptions are a little out of date. The
class system changed dramatically between versions 2.11 and 2.20 due to the
introduction of skills (see later).


Experience: When you kill monsters, you gain experience points (xp) (you also
receive one half experience for monsters killed by your controlled or
summoned creatures). When you get enough xp, you gain an experience level,
making your character more powerful. As they gain levels, characters gain more
hit points, magic points, and spell levels.

Skills: Your character has a number of skills which affect his or her ability
to perform certain tasks. You can see your character's skills by pressing the
'm' key; the higher the skill level of a skill, the better you are at it.
Every time your character gains experience points, those points become
available to increase skills. You convert experience points into skill levels
by practising the skill in question (eg fight with a certain type of weapon,
cast a certain type of spell, or walk around wearing light armour to practise
stealth). The amount of unassigned experience points is shown on the skills
screen.
 You can elect not to practice a particular skill by selecting it in the
skill screen (making it turn dark grey). This means that you will be less
likely to increase that skill when you practise it (and will also not spend
as many experience points on it).

There are a few different types of skills.
  - Fighting skills - "Fighting" is the basic skill used in hand-to-hand
combat, and applies no matter which weapon your character is wielding. In
addition, there are a number of weapon skills which affect your ability to
fight with specific weapons. If you are already good at a weapon, say a long
sword, and you practise for a while with similar weapon such as a short sword,
your practise will be speeded up (and will require less experience) until both
skills are equal. Similar types of weapons include:
 All sword skills;
 Maces & flails and Axes;
 Polearms and Axes;
 Staves and Polearms.
  - Throwing skills - "Throwing" is the basic skill used when throwing things,
and there are a number of individual weapon skills for missile weapons as
well.
  - Magic skills - "Spellcasting" is the basic skill for magic use. Every time
you increase your spellcasting skill you gain some magic points and spell
levels. There are also individual skills for each different type of magic; the
higher the skill, the more powerful the spell. Multidisciplinary spells use an
average of the two skills. Note that Fire, Ice and Holy spells do not have
associated skills.
  - Miscellaneous - This includes a variety of skills:
 Armour : Having a high armour skill means that you are used to wearing heavy
armour, so you gain more AC from it and lose less evasion while wearing it.
 Dodging : When you are wearing light armour, a high dodging skill increases
your evasion score.
 Stealth : Helps you avoid being noticed. Try not to wear heavy armour (or be
encumbered) if you want to be stealthy.
 Stabbing : Lets you make a very powerful first strike against a
sleeping/resting monster who hasn't noticed you yet. This is most effective
with a dagger, slightly less effective with a short sword, and less useful
(although by no means of negligible effect) with any other weapon.
 I think that's all the skills.

If your character does not have a particular skill, they can gain it by
practising as above.


Abilities:
Your character is further defined by his or her abilities, which initially
vary according to class.

Strength affects the amount of damage you do in combat, as well as how much
 stuff you can carry.
Intelligence affects how well you can cast spells.
Dexterity affects your accuracy in combat, your general effectiveness with
 missile weapons, and your ability to dodge attacks aimed at you. Although
 your dexterity does not affect your evasion score (Ev) directly, any
 calculation involving your Ev score also takes account of your dexterity.
AC: This stands for Armour Class. When you something injures you, your AC
 reduces the amount of damage you suffer. The number next to your AC is a
 measure of how good your shield (if any) is at blocking attacks.
EV: This is your evasion score. It helps you to avoid being hit by unpleasant
 things.
Gold: This is how much money you're carrying. Money adds to your final score,
 and can be used to purchase items in shops.
Magic Resistance affects your ability to resist the effects of enchantments
 and similar magic directed at you. Although your magic resistance increases
 with your level to an extent determined by your character class, the creatures
 you will meet deeper in the dungeon are better at casting spells and are more
 likely to be able to affect you. MR is an internal variable, so you can't see
 what yours is.


Exploring the dungeon:

You can make your character walk around with the numeric keypad (turn numlock
off). If this is too slow, you can make your character walk repeatedly by
typing shift and a direction. They will walk in that direction until any of a
number of things happen: a hostile monster is visible on the screen, a message
is sent to the message window for any reason, you type a key, or you are about
to step on anything other than normal floor or an undiscovered trap and it is
not your first move of the long walk. Note that this is functionally
equivalent to just pressing the direction key repeatedly.

If you press shift and '5' on the numeric keypad (or just the number '5' on
the keyboard) you rest for 100 turns or until your hit points or magic return
to full, whichever is sooner. You can rest for just one turn by pressing '.',
delete, 's', or '5' on the keypad. Whenever you are resting, you are assumed
to be observing your surroundings, so you have a chance of detecting any traps
or secret doors adjacent to you.

The section of the viewing window which is coloured (with the '@' representing
you at the centre) is what you can see around you. The dark grey around it is
the parts of the level which you have visited, but cannot currently see. The
'x' command lets you move the cursor around to get a description of the
various dungeon features, and typing '?' when the cursor is over a monster
brings up a short description of that monster (these are all rather sketchy;
I'll write better descriptions when I have time). You can get a map of the
whole level (which shows where you've already been) by typing the 'X' key.
This map specially colour-codes stairs and known traps, even if something is
on top of them.

You can make your way between levels by using staircases, which appear as '>'
(down) and '<' (up), by pressing the '>' or '<' keys. If you ascend an up
staircase on level one, you will leave the dungeon forever; if you are
carrying one of the magical orbs of power, you win the game by doing this.

Occasionally you will find an archway; these lead to special places like
shops, magical labyrinths, and Hell. Depending on which type of archway it is,
you can enter it by typing '<' or '>'. Doors can be opened with the 'o'
command and closed with the 'c' command, and typing control plus a direction
will either open or close a door in that direction.

A variety of dangerous and irritating traps are hidden around the dungeon.
Traps look like normal floor until discovered (usually by activating them). A
discovered trap can be disarmed with the '^' command, although not all traps
can be affected in this way.

When you are in a shop, you are given a list of the shopkeeper's stock from
which to choose, and a list of instructions. You can leave the shop and even
the level and come back later if you want. Unfortunately the shopkeepers all
have an enterprise bargaining agreement with the dungeon teamsters union which
prevents them using non-union labour to obtain stock, so you can't sell
anything in a shop (but what shopkeeper would trust a scummy adventurer like
you, anyway?).

Your goal is to locate one of the Magical Orbs of Power which reputedly exist
somewhere in the dungeon of Crawl and get back to the surface with it in your
possession. It is possible that these ancient artefacts are held somewhere in
one of the various Hells, in which case you're going to have to go down there
and bring them back out. There are also rumored to be some Orbs floating
around in the Abyss, and in the possession of certain of the demon lords of
Pandemonium. Oh, and don't be fooled; a crystal ball, however magical, is
*not* one of the Orbs! When you find an Orb, you will be told what you have to
do next.

A full list of the commands available to you can be accessed by typing '?'
(question mark).

Items:

In the dungeons of Crawl there are many different kinds of normal and magical
artefacts to be found and used. Some of them are unequivocally useful, some
are nasty, and some give you great power, but at a price. Some items are
unique; these have interesting properties which can make your life rather
bizarre for a while. They all fall into several classes of items, each of
which is used in a different way. Here is a general list of what you might
find in the course of your adventures:

Weapons:
These are rather important. You will find a variety of weapons in the dungeon,
ranging from small and quick daggers to huge, cumbersome battleaxes and pole-
arms. Each type of weapon does a differing amount of damage, has a different
chance of hitting its target, and takes a different amount of time to swing.
You should choose your weapons carefully; trying to hit a bat with a
greatsword is about as clever as bashing a dragon with a club. For this reason
it is wise to have a good mixture of weapon skills. Skills affect damage,
accuracy and speed.

Weapons can be enchanted; when they are identified, they have values which
tell you how much more effective they are than an unenchanted version. The
first number is the enchantment to-hit, which affects the weapon's accuracy,
and the second is its damage enchantment; weapons which are not enchanted are
simply '+0'. Some weapons also have special magical effects which make them
very effective in certain situations. Some types of hand weapon (especially
daggers, spears and hand axes) are quite effective when thrown. You can wield
weapons with the 'w' command. If for some reason you want to go bare-handed,
type 'w' followed by a hyphen ('-'). Note that weapons are not the only class
of item which you can wield.

Ammunition:
If you would rather pick off monsters from a distance, you will need
ammunition for your sling or bow. Darts are effective when simply thrown;
other kinds of ammunition require you to wield an appropriate device to
inflict worthwhile damage. Ammunition has only one "plus" value, which affects
both accuracy and damage. If you have ammunition suitable for what you are
wielding, the 'f' command will choose the first lot in your inventory, or you
can use the 't' command to throw anything. If you are using the right kind of
hand weapon, you will "shoot" the ammunition, otherwise you "throw" it.
 When throwing something, you are asked for a direction. You can either enter
one of the directions on your keypad, or type '*' and move the cursor over
your target if they are not in a direct line with you. When the cursor is on
them, press '.' (period) or delete to target them (you can also target an
empty space if you want). If you press '>' instead of  '.', the missile will
stop at that space even if it misses, and if the target space is water, it may
hit anything which might be lurking beneath the surface (which would otherwise
be missed completely). If you type '.' (or del) instead of a direction or '*',
or if you target yourself as described above, you throw whatever it is at
yourself (this can be useful when zapping some wands; see later). Also, if you
type 'p' instead of a direction or '*', you will target your previous target
(if still possible).

Armour:
This is also rather important. When worn, most armour improves your Armour
Class, which decreases the amount of damage you take when something injures
you. Unfortunately the heavier types of armour also hamper your movement,
making it easier for monsters to hit you (ie reducing your evasion score).
This effect can be mitigated by a high Armour skill.

A Shield normally affects neither your AC or your evasion, but it lets you
block some of the attacks aimed at you and absorbs some of the damage you
would otherwise receive from things like dragon breath and lightning bolts.
Wearing a large shield makes you less effective in hand combat.

You can wear armour with the 'W' command, and take it off with the 'T'
command.

Food:
This is extremely important. You can find many different kinds of food in the
dungeon. If you don't eat when you get hungry, you will eventually die of
starvation. Fighting, carrying heavy loads, casting spells, and using some
magical items will make you hungry. When you are starving you fight less
effectively as well. You can eat food with the 'e' command.

Magical scrolls:
Scrolls have many different magical spells enscribed on them, some good and
some bad. One of the most useful scrolls is the scroll of identify, which will
tell you the function of any item you have in your inventory; save these up
for the more powerful and inscrutable magic items, like rings. You can read
scrolls (and by doing so invoke their magic) with the 'r' command.

Magical potions:
While scrolls tend to affect your equipment or your environment, most potions
affect your character in some way. The most common type is the simple healing
potion, which restores some hit points, but there are many other varieties of
potions to be found. Try to avoid drinking poisonous potions! Potions can be
quaffed (drunk) with the 'q' command.

Wands:
Sometimes you will be lucky enough to find a stick which contains stored
magical energies. Wands each have a certain amount of charges, and the wand
will cease to function when its charges run out. You must identify a wand to
find out how many uses it has left. Wands are aimed in the same way as missile
weapons. You invoke the power of a wand by 'z'apping it.

Rings:
Magical rings are among the most useful of the items you will find in the
dungeon, but can also be some of the most hazardous. They transfer various
magical abilities onto their wearer, but in return cause you to consume food
faster. Most rings only speed your metabolism slightly, but powerful rings
like rings of regeneration or invisibility make you hunger very quickly. You
can put on rings with the 'P' command, and remove them by typing 'R'. You can
wear up to two rings simultaneously, one on each hand; which hand you put a
ring on is immaterial to its function.

Staves:
There are a number of types of magical staves. Some enhance your general
spellcasting ability, while some greatly increase the power of a certain class
of spells (and possibly reduce your effectiveness with others). Some are
spell staves, and hold spells which you can cast without having to memorise
them first, and also without consuming food. You must wield a staff like a
weapon in order to gain from its power, and magical staves are as effective as
quarterstaves in combat. Spell staves can be Invoked with the 'I' command
while you are wielding them.

Books:
Books contain magical spells which your character can learn. You can read a
book with the 'r' command, which lets you access a description of each spell,
or memorise spells from it with the 'M' command.

Carrion:
If you manage to kill a monster delicately enough to avoid scattering bits of
it around the room, it may leave a corpse behind for you to play with. Despite
the fact that corpses are represented by the same '%' sign as food, you can't
eat them without first cutting them into pieces with the 'D' command, and
being extremely hungry helps as well. Even then, you should choose your
homemade food with great care.

Miscellaneous:
These are items which don't fall into any other category. You can use them by
wielding and 'I'nvoking them. You can also use some other special items (such
as some weapons) by invoking them in this way.

You pick items up with the ',' (comma) command and drop them with the 'd'rop
command. When you are given a prompt like "drop which item?" or "pick up
<x>?", if you type a number before either the letter of the item, or 'y' or
'n' for yes or no, you will drop or get that quantity of the item.

Typing 'i' gives you an inventory of what you are carrying. When you
are given a prompt like "Throw [or wield, wear, etc] which item?", you can
type the letter of the item, or you can type '?' or '*' to get an inventory
list. '?' lists all appropriate items, while '*' lists all items, appropriate
or not. When the inventory screen is showing "-more-", to show you that there
is another page of items, you can type the letter of the item you want instead
of space or enter.

Some items can be stickycursed, in which case they weld themselves to your
body when you use them. Such items usually carry some kind of disadvantage: a
weapon or armour may be damaged or negatively enchanted, while rings can have
all manner of unpleasant effects on you. If you are lucky, you might find
magic which can rid you of cursed items.

Items like scrolls, potions and some other types each have a characteristic,
like a label or a colour, which will let you tell them apart on the basis of
their function. However, these characteristics change between each game, so
while in one game every potion of healing may be yellow, in another game they
might all be purple and bubbly. Once you have discovered the function of such
an item, you will remember it for the rest of the current game. You can access
your item discoveries with the '\' key.

A very useful command is the 'V' key, which gives you a description of what an
item does. This is particularly useful when comparing different types of
weapons, but don't expect too much information from examining unidentified
items.

Spellcasting:

Magical spells are a very important part of surviving in the dungeon. Every
character class can make use of magical spells, although some are better at
doing so than others. Spells are stored in books, which you will occasionally
find in the dungeon. Each spell has a Level, which denotes the amount of
skill required to use it as well as indicating how powerful it may be. You can
only memorise a certain number of levels of spells; type 'M' to find out how
many. When you gain experience levels, you can memorise more, and you will
need to save up for several levels to memorise the more powerful spells. When
you cast a spell, you temporarily expend some of your magical energy as well
as becoming hungrier (although more powerful spellcasters hunger less quickly
from using magic).

Characters of most classes can only memorise spells of levels less than or
equal to half their experience level. The exceptions to this rule are the
Wizard character, who can memorise any spell of equal or lower level, and
specialist magicians, who can memorise spells of their speciality if they are
of equal or lower level (priests and Paladins are considered Holy
specialists), but memorise all other spells as would any other class.

High level spells are difficult to cast, and you may miscast them every once
in a while (resulting in a waste of magic). Your chance of failing to cast a
spell properly depends on your level, your skills, and the level of the spell.

Many of the more powerful spells carry disadvantages or risks; you should read
the spell description (obtained by reading the spellbook in which you found
the spell) before casting anything.

Some spells are directional, and require you to enter a direction in the same
way as you would when shooting a missile or zapping a wand. Some spells
require the proper materials to be present before they will work; for example,
to animate a skeleton with the necromantic spell, you must stand on a space
where a skeleton is on the top of the stack of items.

Be careful of magic-using enemies! Some of them can use magic just as well as
you, if not better, and often use it intelligently.

Monsters:

In the caverns of Crawl, you will find a great variety of creatures, many of
whom would very much like to eat you. To stop them doing this, you will need
to fight. To attack a monster, stand next to it and move in its direction;
this makes you attack it with your wielded weapon. Of course, sometimes
monsters are just too nasty to beat, and you will find that discretion is
often the better part of valour.

Miscellaneous stuff:

The files included with Crawl are:
CRAWL.EXE    - main executable
CRAWL.TXT    - this file
CWSDPMI.EXE  - a file reqired to run Crawl
CWSDPMI.DOC  - the documentation for a file required to run Crawl
LICENCE.TXT  - the Crawl licence (practically identical to that of nethack)

The scores file does not have to be present (as of 2.02). You can unpack the
zip file into your old crawl directory and the new version will keep using the
old scores file (scores files from any version are usable by any other
version).

To play Crawl you will need a 386 or better running DRDOS or MSDOS. It has
been tested on the following computers:
 A 686/100(P120+) with 16MB RAM running MSDOS 6.22
 A 386DX/33 with 4MB RAM running DRDOS 6.0
 A 386SX/20 laptop with 2MB RAM running MSDOS 5.0 (a bit slow, but playable)
 A Linux version (ported by Svante Gerhard) is available, and should be
  easily adaptable to other similar systems.

Any offers to write ports to other systems are extremely welcome!
I've heard that it will also work under PCDOS and OS/2.
I don't know the minimum memory requirements, but the more the merrier.
A colour monitor helps, but is not absolutely vital.
Sorry, I can't make a 286 version available, because I *need* more than 64Kb
for my code modules!

One strange thing you may notice about Crawl is that it does not keep your
saved games if you die. This is not a bug, it is a feature! If you could
restore your game after dying, you would probably finish the game rather
quickly and lose interest, because most of the fun in Crawl is in the
discovery of its bizarre secrets while taking risks with your characters. It
is possible to cheat by messing around with the save files, but you're only
cheating yourself out of experiencing this game as it was supposed to be
played. If you think Crawl is too difficult, tell me!

Crawl was compiled using the djgpp compiler, and comes with the files
CWSDPMI.EXE and CWSDPMI.DOC. You can contact the author of CWSDPMI.EXE at
sandmann@clio.rice.edu. Read CWSDPMI.DOC for more details.

Although version 2 of Crawl is a complete and finished game, it probably
contains a few unwanted features which crept in without me noticing (all of
the earlier versions did). So, if you find anything which you think may be a
bug, please send details of it to me, including version number, details of
your system, what you were doing (in the game) when it happened, and just what
exactly did happen. Hopefully this will never be necessary, but if it is you
can (as of 1/10/97) reach me at zel@olis.net.au. You can discuss this game on
the newsgroup rec.games.roguelike.misc. I would also appreciate any comments
or suggestions you have about the game, as I intend to continue improving it.

One of the objects of your quest in Crawl (the Orb of Zot) was taken from
Wizard's Castle, a text adventure written in BASIC.

A lot of people have been sending me feedback and bug reports, which is
extremely encouraging. I really appreciate that people have been taking the
time to play my game. Keep it up!

Log of Changes:
The name after each bug is the person who found it and told me first. If you
find a bug and for some reason don't want to be credited, just tell me on the
bug report.

1.0 (2/10/97)
first (rather buggy) version

1.01 (3/10/97)
Shields were changed
Items were made more common
monsters were made less common (this was a bug)
cursed weapons were made less common (this was just bad planning)
I changed the name to make it a bit less egotistical
Bugs removed include:
 a debugging feature of the 'x' command was unintentionally left in;
 the summon scorpions spell summoned a vampire (oops) (Haran Pilpel);
 sometimes +50 armour could be generated (oops again) (Haran Pilpel);
 the inventory item counter was not decremented when you dropped something!
  This would lead to you being unable to pick things up after a while (Darren
  Hebden);
 a bug with detect curse scrolls (Darren Hebden)
 slime creatures and jellies were a bit weak;
 killing normal (not spitting) plants gave you far too much xp;
 your rate of regeneration was not saved properly;
 about half of the rings could never be generated;
 the 's' command would sometimes make you repeat your last move (Haran
  Pilpel);
 I forgot to mention the walk-in-place function in any documentation;
 I set the level builder to put 100 monsters on each new level for
  debugging, and forgot to reset it - I really should playtest more!;
 If you tried to cast spell 'z', you cast the identify spell (Lucas Ackerman);
 plus a few more which I forget right now.

1.02 (4/10/97)
A few more items and traps have been added;
The game now uses the rogue keys (hjklyubn) properly;
You used to be able to throw and zap straight when confused. No longer!

1.03 (4/10/97)
Some unique items were added;
A silly bug, by which your item knowledge was not saved, was fixed (Darren
Hebden);
Teleport traps now work properly;
I think I fixed another bug, but I can't remember.

1.04 (6/10/97)
A few really nasty bugs with saved games were fixed. The game would not save
 enchantments affecting monsters, and would mess up the items carried by the
 monsters (Adam Horowitz);
A bug with the enchanting/corroding of shields was fixed;
A '<=' instead of a '<' led to characters not using shields occasionally
 blocking trap missiles (Adam Horowitz);
You can now type '+' or '-' in the map screen to move around faster (Adam
 Horowitz);
The direction function now accepts '.' as well as delete (Adam Horowitz);
During your first step while long-walking, you can walk on anything (still
 prompts for water etc, though) (Adam Horowitz);
I think that was all.

1.05 (7/10/97)
A minor display bug was fixed;
A bug with restoring clouds from saved games was fixed;
A major bug which caused a segment violation when restoring saved games if
 there were any magical traps on the level was finally discovered and fixed.
Those pathetic worms you see around level 6 are now nastier, and jackals now
 tend to appear in packs.
This time, your item memory really does work.

1.1 (14/10/97)
Several new items and monsters were added;
Labyrinths were added;
Magical weapons are now less powerful;
Some bugs have been fixed - I forget what they were right now;
The source was released, and Crawl is now under the GPL (see Licence.txt for
 details);

1.2 (2/10/97)
The monster and cloud location bits have been completely rewritten, a process
 which turned out to be rather easier than I thought it would be. The new
 system is much more flexible;
Monsters are now a bit more intelligent, especially in the way they treat
 clouds;
Several monsters have been added;
Several items and two new classes of items (Carrion and Miscellaneous) have
 been added;
Several spells, most of them necromantic, have been added;
The Gladiator, Necromancer, and Paladin classes have been added;
A spell type system has been implemented, and several new staves to specialise
 in particular types of magic have been added (conjuration, summoning etc).
New unique items have been added, and a bug (actually, a mistype) which
 prevented some from being generated has been removed;
A few bugs have been removed;
Several other changes have been made, too numerous to mention here.

2.0 (9/12/97)
There have been so many additions in this version that I'm not going to list
 them all, but here is a very incomplete list of bugs and things rectified:
Characters could cause an excessive amount of damage empty-handed (Bridget
 Farace);
Darts didn't fire properly when character not wielding anything (Bridget
 Farace);
Hand crossbows didn't work properly;
Fireballs always did the same amount of damage (0-27), regardless of who cast
 them and how powerful they were;
Going to Hell could have unexpected results due to an out-of-bounds reference
 to levels_exist [].

2.01 (12/12/97)
I had wanted version 2.0 to be a stable and bug-less release, but this was not
to be. Anyway, 2.01 fixes these bugs:
Zapping a wand of polymorph at yourself caused problems (polymorph self hasn't
 been implemented anyway) (Saradon);
Polymorph other didn't work properly;
Choosing a non-existent item in a shop crashed the game (but only sometimes,
 which was why I didn't notice it) (Saradon);
Spell descriptions weren't working properly (Saradon);
Some messages were misspelt due to an indiscriminate search/replace (Adam
 Horowitz);
Detect curse didn't detect curses on unrecognised rings (this bug had
 been present right from version 1.0);
Sometimes, a special weapon in the hands of a monster would not function
 properly (watch out for creatures wielding weapons of draining!);
The use of the control key was not mentioned in the command list (it
 opens/closes doors, like in Angband);
And a few others (if I haven't credited someone, please tell me).
Also, a few new things were added, as suggested by Saradon: A shout command
('!') to attract your followers (and enemies!), and better equipment for the
enchanter. Also, you are now given a difficulty message and prompted when
memorising spells, so you will know which spells you won't be able to cast
reliably before you memorise them.

2.02 (13/12/97)
I'm afraid that 2.01 didn't fully fix the bug in the shop code, but hopefully
this version does. Just about the only differences between this version and
2.01 are:
Pressing r,s or t while in a shop really no longer crashes the game (Saradon &
 Bridget Farace);
If the Scores file is not present, a new one is generated. I've stopped
 including a scores file in the distribution, so that you can unpack the zip
 file into your old crawl directory and keep on using the old score file.
Save games should be compatible with 2.01.

2.03 (22/12/97)
This version fixes a few bugs, and puts back the floating point emulation
which was missing from previous version 2 releases (Daniel Josef Dekok and
someone else noticed this). It also removes the debugging code which was
accidentally included.
Bugs fixed:
Butterfly corpses were coloured black, making them invisible (Bridget
 Farace);
Shadow lanterns were also coloured black, and kept on working even after you
 unwielded them (Bridget Farace);
Items purchased from shops were not identified properly (Lord Gek, Timo
 Laitila);
Scrolls of acquirement weren't being identified after being read;
When you got hit by a monster wielding a weapon of draining, events could
 become confusing (Timo Laitila);
Finally, the '5' key on the keypad works as a rest key (Timo Laitila);
Names longer than 8 letters caused problems with saving and restoring games,
 especially in Windows 95 (Lord Gek & Timo Laitila)

The following new features were also added:
When tame creatures kill monsters, you now get 1/3 xp (Howard Liu);
Orcish spellcasters have been downgraded a bit (lots of people recommended
 this);
Specialist wizards are now slightly more powerful in their specialisation,
 especially with magical staves (I can't find the usenet post which told me
 about this).
And a few other minor changes.

2.10 (30/12/97)
Sorry to all of the many people who've been sending me bug reports, but it's
become too tricky to list all bugs and credit their finder. I'm just getting
too much email, and my mail reader has a strange way of eating some messages
and making them very difficult to find. So from now on, I'll just list some of
the major bugs fixed and major features added:
-A bug with wearing armour of fire/cold resistance was fixed;
-The properties of several items and spells were tweaked a bit;
-Specialist wizards were made even more powerful in their discipline;
-The dungeon was made deeper (36 levels now), and lots of new monsters were
added to fill in the deeper levels;
-Several spells (mostly necromancy) were added;
-The dungeon architecture is a bit more varied, especially as you get deeper;
-A warning was added to labyrinths;
among other things.

2.11 - This was the first Linux release, ported to Linux by Svante Gerhard.

2.20 - This fixed a few very minor bugs and added a vast number of new
features, like vaults, unique monsters, skills, the Abyss, Pandemonium, etc
etc etc. The dungeon architecture is also a lot more varied.

2.21 - Various bugfixes and minor changes.

Licence:
Read Licence.txt for information about the Crawl licence (which is almost
identical to the nethack one).

Source Code:
The source code for the current version of Crawl is, at the time of writing
(30/12/97) available from the Crawl web site:
http://olis.net.au/~zel/index.html
Source for earlier versions can be obtained from me.

Disclaimer:

This software is provided as is, with absolutely no warranty express or
implied. Use of it is at the sole risk of the user. No liability is accepted
for any damage to the user or to any of the user's possessions.
