Some notes about the Linux port of Dungeon Crawl:

Numpad won't work for normal walking. Linux specific code will have to
be written to handle the different escape codes. Use vi-like movement for
now:

            y k u
             \|/
            h-O-l
             /|\
            b j n

To compile source I recommend the following versions or later:
g++ 2.8.1
ncurses 1.9.9e   (1.9.9g also tested sucessfully)
libc5.4.33       (glibc2 also tested sucessfully)

Very little testing has been done so far, so please report bugs to:
Svante Gerhard <svante@algonet.se>       (Linux specific problems)
Linley Henzell <zel@olis.net.au>         (General Q's, and perhaps a CC:)

Thanks to Fredrik Estreen for letting me rave on his machine when testing
the initial crawl port!


[from the 2.10 linux.txt]
Porting to other unixes:

Just for fun, I tried to compile the game on a machine like this:
SunOS kairos 5.5.1 Generic_103640-14 sun4u sparc SUNW,Ultra-1
This is one of the servers that my ISP uses.
With very minor modifications, I got it to compile.

Then I tried the game and it seemed to run great. Of course, I got no fancy
high ascii since I was running over a modemline with vt100 emulation, so
I can't say I really tried it out, but porting should be trivial.

All of my work is donated to Linley Henzell, and thus follows whatever
licensing he chooses for his game.

Svante Gerhard Jan 20 1998.







history:
--------

2.10 beta 1-3: Internal testing. Only partly working, never released.

2.10 beta   4: First version released to public. Feedback wanted.

2.20 Since no serious bug reports were received from the 2.10 release
     this port has now left beta stage. 2.20 was never released however
     since Linley had some problems with bugs. They should be fixed now
     however in...

2.21 All the new features of the DOS 2.21 release. No real LINUX specific
     news however. This version handed over to Linley on Feb 21 1998.

2.30 - 2.32 : Never released for various reasons, mainly due to known bugs
     found in the DOS version. Also, some version had trouble compiling.

2.33 MAJOR code cleanup, mainly by Linley of course. However, also the
     linuxlib had some minor tweaking now when all the warnings are gone.
     (Made my own mistakes stand out :) )
     Also, I noticed Ctrl-j now works for open-door-south. Linley, what did
     you do? ;)

(no release for a while, since I couldn't get a binary because of main
code problems after MAJOR code modifications. Now problems have been sorted
out, a little bit with every version :). It's time for..)

2.70 This one was VERY close to getting released, but a couple of bugs found
     late and Linley's new release made me (and you) wait for..

2.71 Hrm. This one actually got compiled, packaged, ALMOST shipped, when I
     discovered game would crash when trying to eat when an object was
     lying on the floor. Fixed in...

2.72 First Linux release for quite a while. Major game improvements by
     Linley. Linux tty-insane-state-after-game-exit fixed. The problem was
     pinpointed by Martin Read (back in April, actually...) Thanks!
     Even less playtesting than usual this time, so please report any found
     bugs.







ToDo's:

Now that it's possible to run Crawl without high ascii, the Linux version
needs a way to run without colour as well. This should make the game
playable on MANY more systems (not just Linux PC's..)

Fix numpad walking!

Make crawl take advantage of larger displays than 80x25. Probably major
work due to much hardcoded work. Since 2.72, however, everything works
in the larger resolutions I've tried myself (mainly 100x40)

-EOF-
